[Please, do not edit this file. It has been automatically generated by LPdoc]

1 README_CIAODE
***************

This describes the installation procedure for the Ciao Development
Environment, including libraries and manuals, from a _source_
distribution. This applies primarily to Unix-type systems (Linux, Mac
OS X, Solaris, SunOS, etc.), and with some limitations to Windows
(using the Cygnus Win32 development libraries).

It is recommended that you read the `INSTALLATION' file that comes
with each component of CiaoDE. However, in many cases it suffices to
follow this summary:

Top
***

Software Requirements (ciaode)
==============================

For users of Linux distributions, you should install some software
packages required by Ciao that do not come installed by default.
Using the corresponding automatic software management tool, those are:

     Debian/Ubuntu:
     	sudo apt-get install emacs build-essential \
     	    texi2html texlive texinfo imagemagick
     Fedora:
             su
     	yum install gcc kernel-headers kernel-devel emacs texi2html \
     	texinfo ImageMagick

   Some advanced libraries and components, like the cost analysis,
require an additional set of software packages:

     Debian/Ubuntu:
     	sudo apt-get install libgsl0-dev libgsl0ldbl ant ant-optional \
                 sun-java6-jdk g++
     	sudo update-java-alternatives --set java-6-sun

   Fedora:
     	su
     	yum install gsl gsl-devel ant gnu-g++

   Debian/Ubuntu users for 64-bit systems would also need libraries
for 32-bit compatibility:
             sudo apt-get install gcc-multilib libc6-i386 \
                  libc6-dev-i386 ia32-libs
             # Optionally, for the Parma Polyhedra Library
             sudo apt-get install g++-multilib

   To install Java JDK on Fedora, please visit Sun Java website
(`http://java.sun.com/javase/downloads/index.jsp') and follow the
installation instructions there.

   If you are a Ciao developer, it is highly recommended to install
Subversion to access the latest source code in our repositories:

     Debian/Ubuntu:
     	sudo apt-get install subversion
     Fedora:
     	su
     	yum install subversion

   Users of other Linux variants or operating systems should use
similar tools to add the required software packages. In Windows,
doing a full installation of CygWin ensures that you have all the
required packages.

   Note that the GNU implementation of the make Un*x command is
(still) internally used during the installation process. It is
available in many systems (including all Linux systems and Mac OS X)
simply as `make'. If any of the installation steps stop right away
with `make' error messages, you probably need to install `gmake'.

Obtaining the Sources (ciaode)
==============================

  1. If you have obtained your copy of Ciao from a compressed source
     package, uncompress and unpackage it (using `gunzip' or `bzip2'
     and `tar -xpf'). This will put everything in a new directory
     whose name reflects the Ciao version.

  2. Other method to get the sources is from the subversion
     repository (available for ciao developers).


Quick Installation from Source (ciaode)
=======================================

The main command to build and install CiaoDE, located at the root of
the source tree, is called `ciaosetup'. It provides useful commands
to do quick installations from the sources with just one line:

  1. System-wide installation (e.g. as administrator or `root' user):

          ./ciaosetup system-install

  2. User-local installation (that will be accessible just for your
     user)

          ./ciaosetup user-install


   If you need a more advanced control of configuration read the
following section.

Custom Installations (ciaode)
=============================

Advanced uses of CiaoDE would require the customization of the
default build and installation options. In that case, the
installation process usually follows the following steps:

  1. From the directory where the sources are stored, run:

          ./ciaosetup configure

     It will perform a default configuration, where the system will
     be configured to be installed as the system administrator
     (`root') in a standard directory available for all users in the
     machine (e.g., `/usr/local').

     The additional options `--instype=local' will prepare CiaoDE to
     run from the sources directly, and configured in the user's home
     directory (recommended for CiaoDE developers).

     In case you want to install elsewhere, or change any of the
     installation options, you can use a customized configuration
     procedure. The configure command accepts several options. You
     can see a brief description of them with:

          ./ciaosetup configure --help

     Use the `--menu' option to select configuration options
     interactively. You must follow the instructions that appear on
     it. When asked for the configuration level, if you are happy
     with the default options, select the first option and no
     questions will be made. If you need a higher level of
     customization, select the last option.

  2. Once the configuration process has finished, run:

          ./ciaosetup build

     This will build executables and compile libraries.

  3. If you have obtained the CiaoDE source from the SVN repository,
     you need to generate the documentation. This can be done using:

          ./ciaosetup docs

  4. After the compilation completes successfully, run:

          ./ciaosetup install

     This will install everything in the specified directories.


   If you want to see the other available commands, run `./ciaosetup
help'.

