wxCiao - Port of wxWidgets to Ciao programming enviroment 
Written by Erik Lee

This library provides a set of commonly used widgets and operations on
those widgets intended to make GUI building in Ciao easy.  It relies
on the Foreign function interface of Ciao, which currently has a few
bugs.  These will probably be fixed very soon, however.  The current
limitations imposed by these bugs mean that GUIs created using this
toolkit are limited to handling one user interface event successfully
(it will crash on the second event right now).

Building:

You will need to edit the makefile so that CIAO_ENGINE points to the
ciao/engine subdirectory of the CiaoDE 1.13 (or later) source tree.
After that, just type make.  The build requires the following software
to function properly:

CiaoDE 1.13 or higher
wxGTK 2.6 or higher
gnu make

Running:

The build will create a file called libwxCiao.so in the same directory
as the makefile.  You will need to put this file into your library
path somehow before running the gui code from ciao.  There are at
least two ways to do this:

1) Using LD_LIBRARY_PATH

prompt$ LD_LIBRARY_PATH=. ciao go.pl

This tells linux to load libraries from the current directory.  go.pl
is a simple demonstration application for wxCiao, so running it like
this will launch a GUI window with a few widgets in it.

This is a good way to just give it a quick test.


2) Putting the library somewhere in your search path.  If you will be
running lots of programs using wxCiao, this is the recommended
approach.  In my opinion, the best thing to do is to install wxCiao
source somewhere, build the library, and make a symlink to it from one
of the lib directories (such as /usr/lib).  That way updates to wxCiao
will be installed automatically simply by building the new source.
